Harrington Building, who has been in the College
of Education before it was even a College of
Education. He's going to share some ideas and some
thoughts and some perceptions of the things that
have happened over the last 20-some years and fill
me in on what you feel has impacted this college and
some of the changes, some of the things that have
change mainly, I guess, is what I'm interested in.
I'm interested in your own personal perception
versus what I can find in some of the books. I want to
know a little bit about your feelings and about the
culture and the climate of this college and how it
has evolved. Well, that's a very broad,
open-ended kind of question. But let me say that I
think major impact on the college has been the two
deans that have been part of one that was part of the
history and one that was current.
Dean Hubert, who of course later became
chancellor,
had a strong background in education and it was
obvious that he was highly qualified to help this
institution develop a college of education.
And so his perspective, particularly in terms of
how A&M might serve the state of Texas, I think was
very important. Did you have any input back then
when this was in the process of being bounced
around, were you able to have some? There were a
series of meetings. And in fact,
there was a meeting in Caldwell at the motel there,
which name I don't remember at the moment. The
Surrey Inn? Surrey Inn. And we had a three-day
session over there. And who was involved in that?
Well, I think a fairly substantial number of the
faculty in the college, in the Department of
Education at that time. I don't know that all were,
but certainly a majority were. And out of that, I
think that Gilbert used the input from those from
that session as at least a significant part of the
development of the plans for the college. A
similar meeting took place in Galveston, I think
perhaps at the end of the first year that after the
college had been formulated. And that involved,
again, perhaps selective faculty members from
the college, but also included quite a number of
school superintendents and other people from out
in the field that helped to make suggestions as to
what they thought this college of education ought
to be like.
So your initial statement had to do with the two
deans and Hubert being, of course, the catalyst
that got it. I think that I would add to my comments a
little bit more reference to Dean Corrigan, who,
of course, has been our second dean in
almost 20 years. We're 18 years. When I finish
this, it'll be 20 years. It'll be 20 years. And so
two deans.
for that period of time, a pretty good record.
Either we have been easy on our deans, or they have
been either very enduring or something. Is the
lifespan of a dean fairly short on the average? I
know for superintendents it is, but... I think the
tenure of deans is longer than school
superintendents. But Dean Corrigan brought, I
think, a different perspective from his more
national experience and quite a different style
of serving as dean. And I think he has challenged
the faculty at the college to
be abreast of what is going on and what those
national issues may be in order to formulate this
college in the direction in which it might really
have important characters. Has that changed, in
your opinion, how outsiders view the College of
Education since he has come on with this
perspective? Has it focused or has it changed
that?
I don't know that I have real evidence of that. I
have an assumption that that since Dean Corrigan
is better known nationally that there are more
people who know about Texas A&M and understand its
program and have had continuing contacts with
with our Dean so that We probably have continued to
be better known. And I think Dean Corrigan has
added greatly to that. And the mission of the
college, of course, is the teaching, research,
and service. In your perception, how has that
changed or has it changed in the two
administrations, the focus or the? I don't think
that's changed.
That's very much a part of the land grant
tradition, and certainly was the focus from our
beginning in education. Although, of course, it
obviously is not limited to our particular
college.
A college of education, I think, does have
more contact with the field than some colleges.
Certainly not the only one that does, but it has a
continuing relationship with people out in the
field. Dr. Hawkins, is there a variation within
departments as to how much contact there is with
the field? Or is it up to the department heads how
much they focus on that service versus the
research or the teaching or whatever? Well, I
think the nature of each department is such that it
does.
It may make a difference in terms of the people in
the field that are contacted. But I wouldn't want
to suggest that any single department would have
less contact in this department. Since we are a
department-based state administration, always
prided ourselves and endeavored to maintain as
strong a contact with school superintendents and
other administrators in the field as possible and
we have had over the years our so-called june
conference and some other activities school
board workshop that
has
that's been part of our contact mechanism.
There has been tremendous growth, obviously,
since you came here within this college and, of
course, within the department. Has that
affected, to any extent, your work with students?
Has it made any difference? I think so. I think that
it has tended to make each of us,
as faculty members in this department, more
specialized. When I first came,
three of us at least had been superintendents. The
assumption was that we needed to be
able to make contact with superintendents. But
also, this seemed to suggest that we were pretty
much generalists and that we felt and need and
perhaps a capability in identifying with
education in a broad sense.
As we expanded the number of faculty members, we
sought to do that in terms of people who were
specialists and who were expected to fill that
kind of role within the department.
Although in recent years, we've begun to focus
back, in a sense, with several people at one time or
another teaching the same course. Nevertheless,
we still have our identity where we fit in the
department program. You were department head for
a number of years. What did you look for in your
faculty members, or what was something that that
you really, as department head, stressed?
Of course, particularly in the early days,
people without an A&M degree. Because for
at least the first 10 years or so,
hardly ever was anybody with an A&M degree even
seriously considered. Dr. Hoyle, of course, was
our first exception to that. And the
justification for Dr. Hoyle was that he had left
this institution, had served in at least three
other universities, and so came back to us with an
experience base that was reasonably broad. There
have been several other exceptions in more recent
years, but that was one of the criteria that we were
very conscious of. Was that your own personal, or
was that for the whole university? No, no, not the
whole university, but that was Dean Hubert's.
Well, it may have been
referred to as a university policy. But
obviously, each college adhered to that policy to
a greater or lesser degree, depending upon the
direction and priorities of each of the
respective deans. And Dean Hubert was quite firm.
And again, there were exceptions over the years,
but by and large, a real effort to assure that we
didn't just employ our own people. Now, I think
that in addition to that, we were always conscious
of people wanting to bring in people with good,
strong preparation in education
administration. That means that we were
conscious particularly of the institution from
which they got their doctoral degrees. We have
hardly, but almost entirely without exception,
looked for people with administrative
experience.
It also had a concern over the years for a more
diversified faculty. It might not always have
looked that way.
But we did employ,
I think, one of the first minority faculty members
in this department of anywhere in the college. It
might have been the second or so, but it was, I
think, the first with Dean Hubert's
encouragement. Unfortunately, that person
stayed with us only one year.
I think that in the early periods, our emphasis was
more upon minority males than on minority
females.
Composition of the department faculty now, you
can see that we finally found the right road to
travel with
females as part of our faculty. But I must say that
I think that kind of diversity has been very
significant. And the interesting thing, I think,
is that our faculty in our most recent decisions
seem to be very firm in their belief that such
decisions to employ such individuals is very
important for us. There's been a lot of stability,
has there not, in this department as far as
continuity of the faculty and the number of them
being here for many years? I think so. We obviously
have had some changes, but over the years, I guess
probably a greater amount of stability than might
be found in many similar departments.
Is there something that you can attribute that to?
Other than the fact that you all were happy? Oh, I
think one would hope that there's a relationship
between that and a terrible selection of people.
I suppose that another important factor was the
growth of the university. The fact that it's a
little easier for people to stay with an
institution in which there is growth, progress,
at least some improvement in terms of faculty
salaries, all of those kinds of things. What about
promotion and things? Was it easier? I'm not
familiar with the tenure track. Did that have
anything to do with promotion? Yes, I think so. In
the earlier days,
The route to promotion and tenure was,
I don't know if I should say relaxed, but at least
was a little bit faster, perhaps.
And that has slowed down so that now it is through
university policies and procedures, it is a more
carefully monitored
process. But I wanted to add one other thing in
terms of faculty members remaining in the
department. And I think certainly the growth of
the doctoral program, not just expansion of
enrollments in the department, but the fact that
we grew heavily in the direction of doctoral level
work. And many faculty members prefer to to be
where there
is a strong doctoral program. OK. How about some of
the highlights or some of your contributions
personally to the growth of the college and the
department?
Just personal insights or observations,
whatever.
I think one of the things that we tried to do in this
department,
and hopefully because we supposedly know and
understand something about the administrative
process, I think we tried to create here what
represents a department. It always seemed to me,
as I tried over the years to contact people on this
campus, you'd make a contact, you couldn't reach
people. When you reached somebody at the
department level, they didn't know where people
were. They didn't know when they would be
available. There seemed to be
much more emphasis upon the autonomy of faculty
members simply serving the university with the
department responsibilities
seemingly not to be a very important factor. And
I don't know that I'm sure you get varying opinions
from our own faculty, but I think we've known and
understood better than some portions of the
university of what the department's identity
perhaps means. OK. And have you reflected much on
the future and what is happening right now in
education and some of the reforms and what effect
they might be having on the college in, say, the
year 2000 or beyond? Well, I've reflected some. It
may be a little easier to reflect. You're not
department head, and you don't seem to feel as
though you have the same kind of responsibility.
But
I think in terms of the whole reform movement, that
at some point
along the line, I began to feel not as comfortable
as I used to.
But all of the people who have become so defensive
about the charges
against education. I think that's easier at our
level than it is at the public school level where
the school superintendent is
is closer to some of the challenges, perhaps. But I
have been less uncomfortable than some people
with the demands for change. And therefore, I
think to see education administration function
in this department as
that hopefully being able to adjust and to work
within some new structures or some new
perspectives
that
I think really have to come. OK. I think the people
who have always thought, we do have a little
outside influence, don't we? Is that the building
downstairs? I don't know what's going on at the
moment. I think the people who have always thought
that teacher salaries and salaries in general and
education administration could improve first
and that that's going to make us a profession.
I can't see where that point of view has gotten us
very far. It seems to me as though we've We're now in
an era in which we really begin to look upon the
kinds of responsibilities in education with a
different perspective, and the realization
that we need to be 12 months employees, and we need
to see our responsibilities somewhat
differently. I don't know that I have said very
well what I mean, but at least that's just a point of
view that I have. Dr. Hawkins, in your years here,
have you seen any more or less collaborative
efforts within this college, among departments,
and then within the college with other colleges?
Has it changed any? I think so. It's a little hard to
measure that because we haven't been writing it
down over the years. But although we've always
been encouraged to do that, I think that Dean
Corrigan has contributed greatly in terms of that
kind of emphasis. The inquiry structure
at least suggests a framework in which that can
take place, and I think
to a greater extent than what existed before, it
has accomplished its purpose. I
guess that
what that has done is to have created some working
relationships and so on, which have been
strengthened through
more formalized research projects and that sort
of thing. I think there's more of that taking place
than used to be. One of the things that I'm working
on at organizational behavior class is
decision-making processes and the hierarchy and
so forth. Has that changed much since you've been
here? Or has it always been from the top down? Well,
yes. Of course, I think it used to be more so under
Dean Hubert than it is under Dean Corrigan. Part of
the difference is in their administrative
styles, as I mentioned. Of course, again, I hope
those of us in this department understand how that
works and can be somewhat more .
There needs to be opportunities for
participation. And I think that in recent years,
there's been a good deal more faculty input,
faculty participation
on the allocation of university research monies,
that sort of thing. of activities during the year
and so on. Most everybody I talk to is a little
reluctant to share what they feel has been their
greatest contribution. There's sort of a little
reluctance there. Do you have any ideas looking
back what you feel has been maybe your
contribution to the growth of this college or this
department or both?
I think if there's anything that led to my
surviving for a period of time,
it may be that in part because I felt myself to be a
generalist.
I had quite a lot of years of administrative
experience, but I must say that a department
head's position is quite different from anything
that I had previously experienced.
But I
think a desire to try to
get the talents of our faculty,
as well as their idiosyncrasies.
Of course. And that's for all those questions.
When you say that the department head job is quite
different, can you elaborate for just a second on
that? What is it about being a department head that
is, I have not really visited with too many
department heads yet, so. Well, the comparison
that I referred to is that an administrator in
elementary and secondary education despite the
fact that almost all administrators come up
through the ranks and therefore they have been
teachers and despite the fact that there is an
assumption and a reality that there is a division
between teachers and administrators it seemed to
me at least in the period of time when I served in the
public schools, that
if it's not a matter of faculty agreeing with what
administrators have to do, it seems to me as though
there's more of an acceptance, at least. It's
tolerance, whatever. In this level versus in the
public schools? No, within the public schools.
Oh, I see. Within the public schools. In higher
education, nobody agrees with anybody about
anything.
I think people sort of view that as maybe
personally demeaning. Those are kind of strong
words. I'm just saying them partly for effect.
University faculty can sit around for hours and
debate something and never end up with any kind of
decision. And
one thing that I guess I have had to sort of become
accustomed to and wish that I could change but
never could, it was that tendency.
a child trying to get approval from a parent,
there's always one more reason why something
can't be done. And university faculties, I think,
are sort of like that. There's always one more
point of view to be added. So we're never short of
points of view. But you do it very good naturedly.
OK, and finally then, I know you don't have a
crystal ball, but do you see anything in the year
2000 and beyond that will be significant in your
opinion? What is going to be different about this
college, possibly? I
think that
we're going to continue to have a college
education. How about that way? Because there have
been some times, and there are some some
possibilities, you see, that colleges of
education are dinosaurs, I guess. Do you really
believe that? No, but there are lots of people who
think that. And I know one faculty member, this
reference to dinosaur is not really my own. I'm
like some other people. in the federal government
that maybe borrowed from others.